docs: explain the Charmhub public listing process and add a reference list of best practices (#1989)
canonical/operator: docs/explanation/charm-maturity.md

Privately-listed charms will not show up in searches on Charmhub, or general web searches.

> See more: {external+charmcraft:ref}`How to manage charms | Public a charm <publish-a-charm>`

## Phase 3: Public listing on Charmhub

When an author is satisfied that the charm is suitable for wider production use, they can request public Charmhub listing. The charm will be lightly reviewed to ensure that it does what it says that it does, has suitable documentation, infrastructure, metadata, and so forth. After passing review, the charm will show up in searches on Charmhub, and web searches leading to Charmhub.

> See more: [How to request Charmhub public listing](#make-your-charm-discoverable)

Reviewing charms encourages the involvement of the community. 'Community' refers to individuals and organisations creating or contributing to charms, Juju and the wider charming ecosystem. Reviews take place in public GitHub issues so that anyone from the community can participate.

> ### Roles and concepts

Author: ```suggestion
### Roles
```

After passing review, the charm will show up in searches on Charmhub, and web searches leading to Charmhub.

> See more: [How to request Charmhub public listing](#make-your-charm-discoverable)

Reviewing charms encourages the involvement of the community. 'Community' refers to individuals and organisations creating or contributing to charms, Juju and the wider charming ecosystem. Reviews take place in public GitHub issues so that anyone from the community can participate.

### Roles

|Author|Author of the charm or person representing the organisation. The person submitting the charm for review is called the author in this documentation.|
|Publisher|The responsible person or organisation for publishing the charm.|
|Review group|A group of people who watch for review requests, then request changes or assign a suitable reviewer. This is currently the Canonical Charm Tech team.|

> |Reviewer|Person conducting the review.|

Reviewer: Something has gone wrong with this - here's how it looks in the generated docs:

<img width="909" height="224" alt="Screenshot from 2025-09-25 13-53-39" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5dcb8885-1f56-4786-a6d2-bf322fcdfd08" />

Author: I dropped the header row based on an earlier review suggestion and that seems to have caused this. Some Markdown renderers are ok with tables that don't have a header row, but either Sphinx is not or there's a trick to it that I don't know. I've put the header back.

I still wonder if we might drop this table at some point - it's here from the original content, and we do use the "author" and "publisher" term in places and they aren't clear on their own, so there is some value, but it doesn't really seem to fit the rest of the content.

For example, if the workload requires initial passwords to be set, auto-generate them and provide them to the Juju user via an action or secret. Host names and load balancer addresses are examples that often cannot be set with a sensible default: cover these in the documentation and indicate clearly in the status messages when they are not set and how the user should fix that.

### The charm is compatible with the ecosystem

Ensure that newly proposed public interfaces have been reviewed and approved to ensure:

- The interface is ready for adoption by other charmers. In most cases this will mean providing a library to help other charms provide or require a relation using the interface.
- There are no conflicts with existing interfaces of published charms.
- Interface names and structure are consistent with the charming ecosystem.
- Tests cover integration with the applications consuming or providing the relations.

> See more:
>  - [charmlibs](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/charmlibs/)

> ### The charm respects `juju model-config`

Author: Thanks - I was copying this new one over and probably put it in too many places.

> ### The charm respects `juju model-config`

Author: Ah, I remember now. The existing Juju page has:
* The general note about not duplicating model-config. I put a shorter version of this in as a best practice.
* Promotion of a library that wraps handling the model-config proxy variables. I added this to the general libraries list in the charmlibs docs.
* This specific example of the proxy variables, which I put here.

I feel like these really belong in a new how-to guide "how to proxy network connections" (or similar), because we have hardly any docs on this and it does come up as a question reasonably regularly. However, I have a bunch of other doc work that I should finish before doing that :disappointed:.

That left me unsure where to put this specific example. Maybe I should just add it to the best practice? For example:

```
Don't duplicate model-level configuration options that are controlled by {external+juju:ref}`juju model-config <command-juju-model-config>`. For example `juju-http-proxy` ... makes any HTTP request.
```

However, that means it goes into the collected list that this PR is adding and also the checklist in the review process. I'd rather keep them small where possible.

Maybe I should just drop the specific example for now, and open an issue to write that how-to?

For example, if the workload requires initial passwords to be set, auto-generate them and provide them to the Juju user via an action or secret. Host names and load balancer addresses are examples that often cannot be set with a sensible default: cover these in the documentation and indicate clearly in the status messages when they are not set and how the user should fix that.

### The charm is compatible with the ecosystem

Ensure that newly proposed public interfaces have been reviewed and approved to ensure:

- The interface is ready for adoption by other charmers. In most cases this will mean providing a library to help other charms provide or require a relation using the interface.
- There are no conflicts with existing interfaces of published charms.
- Interface names and structure are consistent with the charming ecosystem.
- Tests cover integration with the applications consuming or providing the relations.

> See more: [charmlibs](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/charmlibs/)

### The charm respects the Juju proxy options

> `juju-http-proxy`, `juju-https-proxy`, and `juju-no-proxy` should influence the charm's behavior when the charm or charm workload makes any HTTP request.

Author: > For the [...] part, it looks like Ops doesn't expose the corresponding environment variables through the framework, am I right?

Yes, because the Juju team don't think that these are the best way to handle things and want to make improvements in the future, and would rather we wait for that.

> So would the best way be to use the new `JujuContext` object?

No, they're not getting exposed there either (for the same reason). You need to pull them out of `os.environ` yourself, and I think the non-Juju versions get automatically set in some cases? I'm not totally sure.

Or you look at the listing of general charm libraries and find the one that handles this for you and use that :).

> `juju-http-proxy`, `juju-https-proxy`, and `juju-no-proxy` should influence the charm's behavior when the charm or charm workload makes any HTTP request.

Reviewer 2: The list of model configurations keys in Juju is autogenerated (in not in 3.6, for sure in 4), so adding suitable intersphinx targets will be a little bit harder than usual. That said, we can give it a try!

### The charm upgrades the application safely

The charm supports upgrading the workload and the application. An upgrade task preserves data and settings of both.

```{tip}

> Support upgrades sequentially, so that users of the charm can regularly apply upgrades in the sequence of released revisions.

Reviewer: I don't fully get this. Does it mean that users should be able to upgrade directly to revision X when they're on revision X-2 (for example), without needing to upgrade to revision X-1 as a stepping stone?

```

### The charm supports scaling up and down

> If the application permits or supports it, the charm does not only scale up but also supports scaling down. Scale-up and scale-down can involve the number of deployment units and the allocated resources (such as storage or computing).

Reviewer: If I understand correctly, "application" should be "workload", for consistency of terms. I'd also consider simplifying the wording. Using "involve" doesn't really make sense to me. How about something like:

```suggestion
If the workload supports scaling, charm can be scaled up or down. Scale-up and scale-down may change the number of deployed units and the allocated resources (such as storage or computing).
```

Anyone can pack a charm and `juju deploy` it passing in the `.charm` file. This is frequently done during development, but can also be used for private charms.

> See more:
>  - {external+juju:ref}`How to manage applications | Deploy an application <deploy-an-application>`

## Private listing on Charmhub

Anyone can publish a charm to Charmhub (you'll need to create an account, and there are some restrictions on charm names). Once this is done, anyone can see the Charmhub page for the charm, or deploy from Charmhub, as long as they know the charm name. *These charms will not show up in searches on Charmhub, or general web searches*.

> See more:
>  - {external+charmcraft:ref}`How to manage charms | Public a charm <publish-a-charm>`

## Public listing on Charmhub

When an author is satisfied that the charm is suitable for wider production use, they can request public Charmhub listing. The charm will be lightly reviewed to ensure that it does what it says that it does, has suitable documentation, infrastructure, metadata, and so forth. After passing review, the charm will show up in searches on Charmhub, and web searches leading to Charmhub.

> See more:

> >  - [How to request Charmhub public listing](#make-your-charm-discoverable)

Reviewer 2: I'd put these on the same line:

```suggestion
> See more:  [How to request Charmhub public listing](#make-your-charm-discoverable)
```

|Publisher|The responsible person or organisation for publishing the charm.|
|Review group|A group of contact persons watching for review requests to arrive and requesting modifications or assigning a review to a suitable reviewer. This is currently the Canonical Charm Tech team.|
|Reviewer|Person conducting the review.|
|Listing|After the reviewer has reviewed the charm successfully, it can be switched to 'listing'. Listing means that the charm will be part of the search result when querying the web pages and API of Charmhub.io, and is in the Charmhub sitemap (so will be found by third-party search engines). Without 'listing', the charm will be available under its URL but is not listed in searches.|

## Ongoing maintenance and evolution

Public listing is not the end of a charm's growth. Truly mature charms offer more integration across the charming ecosystem (ingress, observability, identity, ...), gracefully handle scaling up and down, and more. These noteworthy charms are most likely to get wide adoption, and be featured in editorial content in the charming world. Some specific standards that Juju users are looking for include:

> ### The charm has sensible defaults

Reviewer 2: All these subsections are covered in the Charm maturity doc, aren't they? I'd just link there. If any bits aren't there yet, I'd incorporate them there.
